add multi-gpu docs (#749)
scverse/rapids_singlecell: docs/multi_gpu.md

# Using GPUs on a multi-GPU system

You do not need to be a CUDA expert to run rapids-singlecell on a machine with

> several GPUs. Most analyses use one GPU. The main decision is whether you want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
several GPUs. Most analyses use a single GPU. The main decision is whether you want
```

to run independent analyses on separate GPUs or use several GPUs for one
supported operation.

> This page starts with common recipes. The final sections explain the underlying

Reviewer: I think this can be removed. The TOC is enough for that.

| Keep a small display GPU out of an analysis | Exclude it from `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`, for example by starting with `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1`. |
| Use several GPUs for one supported RSC operation | Make only the intended GPUs visible and pass `multi_gpu=True` or an explicit device list. |
| Process an out-of-core or distributed dataset | Use Dask-CUDA; see {doc}`out_of_core`. |

The most important rule is:

> Assign GPUs before CUDA is initialized in the Python process or notebook
> kernel. Use an RSC function's `multi_gpu` argument to control work inside that
> process.

`CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` accepts simple integer IDs such as `0` and `1`. GPU UUIDs
are also supported when a stable physical identity is important.

## Check which GPUs Python can see

Run this near the beginning of a script or notebook:

```python
import cupy as cp

print("Number of visible GPUs:", cp.cuda.runtime.getDeviceCount())
print("Current GPU:", cp.cuda.Device().id)
```

If you start Python with `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1`, that physical GPU is renamed
to logical device `0` inside Python. Seeing `Current GPU: 0` is therefore
expected.

> ## The default GPU receives most single-GPU allocations

Reviewer: This is great information but it's now in the multi_gpu doc. Maybe this should be in a different doc so that more people see it and not just the ones looking for multi gpu stuff?
We can also rename this doc to something more general like "gpu_configuration.md" or so?

usually follow it.

This can be a problem on workstations where physical GPU `0` is a small display
card and another GPU has more memory. The analysis can run out of memory on the
display card even when the larger GPU is empty.

Exclude the display GPU when starting the process:

```bash
# Use physical GPU 1 and hide physical GPU 0 from this analysis.
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1 python analysis.py
```

Inside this process, physical GPU `1` becomes logical device `0`. RSC and CuPy
can use it normally without changes to the analysis code.

For a multi-GPU analysis, list only the compute GPUs. For example, if physical
GPU `0` is the display card and GPUs `1` and `2` are compute GPUs:

```bash
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1,2 python analysis.py
```

The compute GPUs are logical devices `0` and `1` inside that process. An RSC
operation that uses all visible GPUs can then use both compute cards without
touching the display card.

Selecting a current device with `cp.cuda.Device(1).use()` is possible, but
masking is safer: another library or an RSC operation whose automatic behavior
uses all visible GPUs can still access the display GPU if it remains visible.

## Common recipes

> ### Run one analysis on one GPU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run analysis on a single GPU
```

> ### Run one analysis on one GPU

Reviewer: This whole section feels like a repetition of what you've already explained just above. Why do you want to state this again?

Each Jupyter notebook normally has its own Python kernel process. In a fresh
kernel, the first cell can set GPU visibility before importing CuPy,
rapids-singlecell, or another CUDA library.

In notebook A, make this the first cell:

```python
%env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0
```

In notebook B, make this the first cell:

```python
%env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1
```

Then verify the assignment in the next cell:

```python
import cupy as cp

assert cp.cuda.runtime.getDeviceCount() == 1
assert cp.cuda.Device().id == 0
```

Restart each kernel before using this setup, and always run the visibility cell
before any CUDA import or operation. If CUDA was already initialized, changing
the environment variable does not change which GPUs that kernel can see.

Use the IPython `%env` command, not a shell command such as
`!export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0`. Commands prefixed with `!` run in a child
shell; environment changes in that shell do not propagate back to the notebook
kernel.

### Use several GPUs for one RSC operation

Some RSC functions can divide one computation across several GPUs. First make
only the intended GPUs visible:

```bash
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,1 python analysis.py
```

> Then request multi-GPU execution from a supported function:

Reviewer: Should we have this be a global setting like:

`rsc.settings.multi_gpu = True`?

it can then still be disabled but you don't always need to repeat it

```python
import rapids_singlecell as rsc

rsc.gr.co_occurrence(
    adata,
    cluster_key="cluster",
    multi_gpu=True,
)
```

You can also select logical devices explicitly:

```python
rsc.gr.co_occurrence(
    adata,
    cluster_key="cluster",
    multi_gpu=[0, 1],
)
```

Multi-GPU execution is not automatically faster for every dataset. It requires
splitting work and transferring data to each GPU. For smaller data, one GPU can
be faster.

### Use Dask for distributed or out-of-core data

Dask-CUDA normally starts one worker process per GPU. This is different from a
single Python process using an RSC function's `multi_gpu` argument.

Use Dask when the data are already Dask-backed, do not fit on one GPU, or need a
distributed pipeline. See {doc}`out_of_core` for supported functions and
cluster configuration.

> ## What `multi_gpu` means in RSC

Reviewer: Do we really need this section? Feels kinda obvious to me. IDK whether you'll keep this list up to date anyways.

Functions that support `multi_gpu` generally accept:

- `True`: use all GPUs visible to the process.
- `False`: request a single-GPU path.
- `[0, 1]`: use the listed logical GPU IDs.
- `"0,1"`: use the listed logical GPU IDs as a comma-separated string.

The default value, `None`, is currently function-specific. Do not assume it
always means one GPU.

| RSC API | Behavior with `multi_gpu=None` |
| --- | --- |
| {func}`~rapids_singlecell.gr.co_occurrence` | Uses all visible GPUs. |
| {func}`~rapids_singlecell.gr.spatial_autocorr` permutation tests | Uses all visible GPUs. |
| Multi-GPU-capable {class}`~rapids_singlecell.ptg.Distance` metrics, including `edistance` and `wasserstein` | Use all visible GPUs. Metrics without multi-GPU support use one GPU. |
| Exact Wilcoxon in {func}`~rapids_singlecell.tl.rank_genes_groups` | Uses all visible GPUs for CPU input and device-resident one-versus-one input. Device-resident one-versus-rest input stays on its owning GPU. |
| Streaming t-test and binned Wilcoxon in {func}`~rapids_singlecell.tl.rank_genes_groups` | CPU input uses the current GPU. GPU-resident input stays on its owning GPU. |

> Use `multi_gpu=True` when using all visible GPUs is intentional. Use an explicit

Reviewer: LLM noise. Kinda obvious

   kernel started.
5. Restart a notebook kernel after changing its GPU assignment.
6. Remember that a process listed by `nvidia-smi` may only have an idle CUDA
   context; it is not necessarily performing work.

For independent jobs, the most reliable protection against accidental overlap
is to give each process or kernel only its assigned GPU.

## Advanced: how GPU selection works

The controls involved in GPU execution have different purposes:

| Control | Scope | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Scheduler or container assignment | Job or container | Enforces the platform's GPU allocation. |
| `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` | Python process or Jupyter kernel | Determines which GPUs CUDA libraries can see. |
| A function's `multi_gpu` argument | One RSC operation | Selects visible GPUs for that operation. |
| {class}`cupy.cuda.Device` | Current host thread | Selects the default logical device for new CUDA work. |
| `rmm.reinitialize(devices=...)` | RMM memory resources | Configures allocators; it does not hide or select GPUs for algorithms. |

### Physical and logical device IDs

List physical GPU indices and UUIDs with:

```bash
nvidia-smi -L
```

> CUDA renumbers the devices listed in `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`. For example:

Reviewer: This was already explained twice above.
LLM noise
